2024-2025 Science Fair Project

How to run:

The SARCOMANetProject.ipynb file uploaded just needs to be downloaded and opened in Google Colab Notebooks. Once Google Colab Notebooks opens up, locate the tab "Runtime", click on it and in the dropdown you will see the option "Run all". You can click on it to run the program.

Note: The SARCOMANetProject.ipynb file cannot be run without downloading the exact data files referenced in the code cells from The Cancer Genome Atlas, which requires either the GDC Transfer Tool or manual downloads to save the large whole slide imaging (.svs) files and RNA Sequencing files from TCGA-SARC database. This process can take several dozen hours. **Also, the SARCOMANETProject.ipynb file cannot be displayed in GtiHub due to size constraints, so, to view the code, please download and view using an IDE such as Visual Studio.**

**Abstract**: 

Sarcoma is a rare, often heterogeneous cancer that develops in the bones and soft tissues. Current sarcoma treatment relies on subtype identification, requiring extensive manual pathological examination, and tumor-driving gene (biomarker) identification, requiring expensive, repetitive molecular testing. Also, sarcoma chemotherapy often employs a “one-size-fits-all” approach with varied patient outcomes. Thus, there is a need for high-confidence, targeted chemotherapy delivered efficiently. The proposed novel pipeline, SARCOMA-Net, addresses these challenges to personalized sarcoma therapies by accelerating subtype classification, target gene identification, and drug discovery. This two-phase pipeline uniquely combines: (1) spatial-transcriptomic biomarker analysis using whole slide imaging (WSI) and RNA sequencing data, and (2) molecular drug generation. In phase 1, using WSI and RNA-Sequencing data from TCGA-SARC, a convolutional neural network (CNN) model was trained to simultaneously predict sarcoma subtype and upregulated tumorous genes , identified using Principal Component Analysis, from pathological images. Using the model's identified, patient-specific biomarker genes (e.g. MT-CO1), in phase 2, pre-existing ChemBL drugs inhibiting the identified biomarkers were queried. The chemical structures and molecular fingerprints of these drugs were used to train a variational autoencoder to generate novel drug compounds from its latent space. These compounds were filtered using Lipinski's Rule of Five and SwissDock generated binding affinities (<-7 kcal/mol), yielding a set of 24 viable drug candidates. SARCOMA-Net reduced the initial drug discovery timeline from months to hours with patient-specific precision. Given its translational flexibility, SARCOMA-Net can be reimplemented across cancers by substituting patients' unique WSI and RNA-Sequencing data into the pipeline.
